Welcome to the test set. Here we talk with some of the brightest thinkers and tinkerers in
statistical analysis, scientific computing, and machine learning, digging into what makes them
tick, plus the insights, experiments, and OMG moments that shape the field.
On this episode, we sit down with Kelly Bodwin, board game nerd,
candy corn defender, and assistant professor of statistics and data science at Cal Poly.
Hey, Kelly, welcome to the test set, where we chat with interesting folks in data and see what makes
them tick. We're so happy to have you on. For a little bit of background, Kelly Bodwin is a
professor at Cal Poly, which is short for California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo.
And we're also joined by Wes McKinney, who's a principal architect at Posit and the creator of
pandas and interesting libraries like Ibis and Python. So, Kelly, we're so excited to have you
on. We've chatted with a few different people who are our professors and educators. I feel like
I'm so excited to talk because I love the energy you bring to any time we see at conferences.
And I know when preparing for this, you mentioned a lot of really interesting stuff about
sort of how you got to where you are today and also what makes you tick in terms of
collaboration. But to maybe kick it off, I'm curious to hear what
gets you out of bed in the morning. And is it, per our conversation, a Coke and orange juice?
Yeah, I think I put it as a controversial opinion that a morning drink I enjoy. I don't drink it
that much because it's very sugary. But yeah, a half Coke, Coca-Cola, and a half orange juice.
And it's like, it's like Orangina, but with a little caffeine.
Okay, with a little bit of a kick.
It looks weird, but it's delicious. So don't knock it till you try it.
Are you, are you toting this like in a Coke bottle or do you have it in a thermos? Do you disguise it?
It was like born in college. So it was from the machines, you know, so it was in a little
plastic cup. So I think, I think you have to see the weird color to truly appreciate the drink.
Yeah. Yeah. You're saying this is born out of like an undergrad dining hall.
Exactly.
You have the orange juice right here and the Coke right here.
I didn't have a caffeine habit until grad school. And so like this much Coca-Cola was enough to
wake me up all day.
Yeah. Wait, I love that. I love who's born out of undergrad dining hall ingenuity.
Yeah.
It makes so much sense to me. What, yeah, what gets you out of bed in the morning
outside of fancy beverages?
Um, I mean, so definitely the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the, the,
so definitely the main motivator for me is always like other people, either excitement to see them
or knowing they have expectations on me. Um, so this is why the professor job works well for me,
because I got to get out of bed because I got to teach a class. So I can't just not go to that.
I'm not a morning person. So, you know,
literally what gets me out of bed is that I have commitments.
The need to appear.
Yeah. Yeah.
Wait, I love that.
What's exciting to me is always the, like the human interaction. Like I did not,
I was not a happy person during COVID. Um, and I would rather,
I know it's not possible, but I'd rather be in person with you too, as well. I, uh,
I just, I like being in my department, you know, I'm friends with all my colleagues in my department
and we chat in the hallways and then, you know, being in the classroom with students is really
fun. I really like the lecturing and I really like chatting with them. So those are the things
that motivate me. And, uh, and then, you know, outside of the teaching context, like even in my
personal life, you know, I'm known to not be home in the evenings because I just want to go see
people and do the things most of the time. Yeah. Yeah. I'm curious. So you're like,
you mentioned you're sort of deep into a quarter. Like, what is your, like,
what does your week look like, uh, as a professor?
This quarter I'm, you know, pretty chock-a-block like nine to six. Uh, so I have three different
classes right now that I'm teaching, um, which is difficult load for us, three courses, or well,
it's usually like three sections, but sometimes two will be the same course. Um, you know,
so after this, I've got to rush over and teach four hours of lecture. Um, but, uh, and then I
have, we just started a master's program, which is really cool. Um, so this is the third year of
it, the second year that I've supervised students. So I've got four master's students. Um, so I've
got, you know, meetings with them scattered throughout the week and then lots of admin
and grading type stuff throughout the day too, you know, on committees and whatnot. So, uh, what I
like about the job, right. Is that like every day looks quite different and every quarter looks quite
different. Um, right now it's week seven out of 10, we just gave midterms. So I've got a pile of
midterms sitting over here to grade and that, and that makes it a tough time in the quarter. Um,
but yeah, I mean, the average day is just like running across campus from a meeting to a lecture
to a meeting to office hours. Yeah. And do your master's students, um, are they working,
what does their work look like? Like, do they work in different fields or?
Um, I mean, it's a statistics master's program, so everything is statistics adjacent. Um, but
there's quite a variety of projects like in the program. Um, some of them will be applied
projects with kind of partners on campus. Um, mine, I mean, last year, three of them were
tidy classed our projects. So contributing new algorithms to tidy classed, um, or since I knew
algorithms, ones that have not been built into tidy class yet. Uh, so it's a thesis driven program.
So they do independent research. So the ones that work with me tend to do are, um, although I have
a couple more just like applications and stuff. Um, I've actually got one this quarter working on
my, like something related to my PhD thesis, which I haven't really touched since I graduated. So
that's very cool. Um, but yeah, it's, it's all statistics writ large. What was your journey?
Like sort of into data science and being a professor, what did that look like?
Yeah. I mean, so I started college thinking I would do either pure math and physics or
English and French. So I was like all over the place. And then when I took a probability class
with Joe Blitzstein, um, who was my advisor in undergrad, that was what made me say,
oh no, I'm going to do statistics. This is so cool. Um, so it was very much a focus on statistics.
We weren't really, you know, saying data science too much back then anyway. Um, and so then I guess,
you know, my classes used R, but I didn't really learn R. And then I did a senior thesis with Joe
Blitzstein, uh, where I was doing a lot of simulation in R. So that was where I came to,
I guess. I wouldn't say at that point I loved it. I would say at that point I knew how to use it.
Um, and then, uh, and then I went to grad school and a lot of my work was also like R, but again,
that wasn't the main focus. I'm just focused on R because like my path to data science is definitely
as an R person. Um, and then I came to Cal Poly and my first year at Cal Poly, I went down with
a colleague, with Shannon Pelleggi, to, um, the RStudio conference. And it was just like,
that was the awakening. It blew my mind. But even then, like, I wouldn't have said data science.
Even then, the data science program at Cal Poly, we have a, um, we call it a cross-disciplinary
studies minor, but it's more of a double major with math, with CS and that. Um, but I wasn't
teaching in that because that's largely Python. And also, like, I didn't know much about predictive
modeling and stuff. Um, so I still wouldn't have said data science, even though I was doing a lot
of R and teaching the R classes. And then eventually, I say during COVID, uh, I picked
up the Python class and I learned Python. Um, and that was, yeah, more or less, was when, uh, that
was when I was teaching in the data science program. So I was like, okay, I guess I'm a
data science professor now. But to me, to me, there's not a difference between data science
and statistics. Like, I think they're kind of two words for the same thing. I mean, certainly there's
the, like, theoretical math, stat, and probability that's maybe outside the sphere, but I don't
really make a distinction between statistics and data science, so I don't really care which one.
It's a little bit of a, it's a little bit of a marketing term, like, I think.
Yeah.
I guess there was, there was an effort to position it as, like,
statistics done in a business context and by people with domain knowledge. I remember the
whole, like, Drew Conway, uh, Ven, Ven, famous Ven diagram. But
there were people in domain fields doing data science, right? And I don't necessarily know
that it's accurate to describe all of those people as data scientists, right? Like, I have
worked with biological data often, and I am not a biologist, you know? Um, so, you know, I sometimes,
because it's a marketing term, I sometimes think it's overused as, like, a catch-all for,
I touch data with a computer. But, like, these days, everybody touches data with a computer,
almost everybody, you know? And so, to me, like, data scientist is more, like, the set of skills
that lets you tackle any data set that comes your way. Um, which, you could still, I guess, break
that set of skills into many stages, and some of them are more computer science-oriented, and some
of them might be more, like, statistics and analysis-oriented. So, I don't want to erase
computer science from the equation, but it just feels like, here's some data, how do we make
conclusions, is already what statistics is doing. So, uh, I don't really make a huge distinction.
I have a friend who, he used to say that we should start calling all our classes data science,
and we should call the probability class theoretical data science.
I mean, I think one of the problems that, I think one of the problems that emerged was that,
that at a certain point, data scientist wasn't a specific enough term, and it started to include
too many skills, and so then businesses were searching for these, like, unicorn individuals
who are, like, really good at DevOps and building pipelines and configuring stuff in the cloud,
but also, like, know how to do statistics and do causal inference and all those, all those things,
as well as being, like, really good software engineers. But I think, like, the reality is that
now things have become, like, more specialized, and so, so I find that I see fewer and fewer
job postings and companies that are searching specifically for a data scientist and more
looking for, like, a statistician, or a research engineer, or an AI infrastructure engineer, or,
like, a, you know, data infrastructure engineer, or something like that, which seems like a healthy
thing, because then they actually know what they want, rather than expecting this, like,
unicorn person who's an expert at doing everything.
Yeah, I'm surprised you say that trend, though, because I, the students are always asking me,
like, how do I search for jobs, because I search data scientist, and then, like,
this one wants SQL, and this one wants R, and this one wants none of the above, and I just tell
them, like, search by skill or language instead. Yeah, I think that's good advice.
It's interesting. I know DBT, at their Coalesce conference, had an interesting talk that was, like,
down with data science, which was a little bit more about the kind of, like, broadness of
the title versus, like, more specific things.
One of the dirty secrets, or maybe, you know, ugly reality is that a lot of data science roles,
especially, like, thinking about, like, the mid-2010s to the late 2010s, a lot of those
jobs ended up being essentially doing business intelligence, like building dashboards and
counting things, and not actually doing that much statistics or real data analysis, like,
maybe some exploratory data analysis, which is a real thing that does require skill and experience,
but, like, a lot of the end deliverables would be, like, building, crafting dashboards and
reports and things that were a little bit more mundane, and so now you're seeing more of those
roles are being a little bit more reframed as, like, you're an analytics engineer or a business
intelligence engineer or something like that, more or less a dashboarding specialist, or, like,
being able to build all the stuff that goes into producing the final dashboard that gets delivered
to the business. Yeah. Yeah, Kelly, I'm curious, like, have you seen changes over time in, like,
what students want to do, whether they think of it as stats or data science?
Um, I mean, I think that long, longer term, like, 10 to 15 years, there's definitely a move
towards more interest in programming, you know, in learning R or Python, and then using that in
the job. Honestly, right now, the students are struggling to get jobs, and so they are not being
picky about it, so a lot of them are ending up in, like, good jobs that pay them to do data things,
and it's not really necessarily their dream. We're seeing a few more go into grad school
in the last couple years, go into PhD programs after our master's or that sort of thing.
Yeah, that's an interesting side of it, sort of just the, like, demand for jobs, how that
affects students. There was a bubble, and there's also whatever's happening in the economy right
now, but there was a data science bubble, right, that's kind of on the edge now, where
when I majored in statistics in undergrad, I was one of, I think, eight that graduated my year,
and now it's 500 per year, you know, in that program, so, and then data science obviously
wasn't, like, a thing, and now there's degrees in data science, so I think there's also
just the delay when the market needs something to when, like, educational programs can deliver
that thing, and so now there's enough data scientists going into the market for the needs
of the market, and so it's harder for students to find specific jobs. Can't pick and choose quite
as much as someone who graduated, you know, seven years ago or something. Yeah, it's interesting you
mentioned, like, before, too, the, you said something like people in domains were already
doing data science, like, there were people sort of, like, specialized in things, already analyzing
data. It is interesting the shift, like, from that eight-person class that's more, like, general,
like, analyzing data less specific to a domain, to kind of, like, 500 people focused on kind of
the broader, I guess, the more methodological side. Well, I didn't know it was a statistics
program, so I think it's still equally general. It's the same program, just more people wanting
a statistics degree than it used to be. It used to be a very niche degree, yeah.
Yeah, I guess it's interesting there's so many people trying to, like, go that way.
Yeah, it is true right now that there's a little bit of, like, a quiet, let's say, like, a quiet,
quiet recession combined with perhaps, like, depending on who you ask, like, an AI-driven
reduction in entry-level jobs and things like that. So, I mean, it's always curious.
It's been interesting the last couple years talking to folks in education and academia,
just to see how, like, AI is affecting, like, affecting the students, affecting their psychology.
There's, I know, like, among people doing, like, kids in school doing computer science,
there's a lot of existential dread about, like, are there going to be, is there going to be a job
waiting for me when I, when I graduate? I feel, I feel like maybe statistics and data science work
in general maybe is a little bit more robust to some of that, because I feel like data science
is still one of the areas where human judgment and having a human in the loop is still really
important. And so maybe we'll be slightly more resistant to some of the, like, AI erosion. Like,
maybe somebody doing computer science, we're going to build a CRUD data entry app at a,
you know, Fortune 500 company. Maybe those jobs are more likely to be eliminated than
somebody with statistics skills who actually needs to, like, analyze data and do real and do, like,
nuanced analysis that is more difficult to automate with a coding agent. I don't know,
like, I'd be curious, like, what you're seeing or, like, what the vibe is.
Yeah, it's pretty, like, the AI can ace all my exams, including my conceptual exams.
So it can figure out, like, what's the right statistical test or model to use,
given some data information. So it can do a lot of, like, sort of base level things.
The places where I've found the human judgment most needed, I guess, would be
the data, the EDA, honestly. I mean, AI can produce, like, exploratory plots and so forth,
or maybe spot little issues. But the understanding of the structure of the data,
like, does this observational unit really address the problem that I'm trying to address? Like,
that still feels like it needs a human. And then I've found, you know, every now and then,
when I'm, like, stuck on my own applied project, and I'm like, what model should I be trying here?
If I turn to AI, it usually gives me unnecessarily overcomplicated answers.
They're not wrong, per se, but they're, like, more than is needed. So I suspect that just will
continue to improve a little bit. But the judgment to know when AI has gone overboard is maybe where
human is needed. Yeah, certainly you can't, like, quite vibe code as directly as you can with some
of these coding tasks. But I think that those jobs, especially, like, more basic data analysis jobs,
are still in danger of being taken over. Yeah. I know you're working on some projects,
and you mentioned before that you are using Gen AI a little bit, and sort of being productive
with AI on some projects. I'm curious, you talked a little bit about EDA and that dynamic,
I'm curious some of your other interactions. I'm very resistant to using it for any writing,
because I'm an English minor. I still am attached to writing my own things, so I'm
resistant to that. But on the other hand, like, the essay or the papers I'm getting from my
students are much better. I don't hate that I don't have to read as bad of writing anymore.
But for myself, I honestly don't use it that much in my research. I use it, like I said,
sometimes to, like, suggest the next path forward. I've used it to unstick myself when I can't
motivate myself to work. More often than not, I'll say, you know, I'm trying to write this thing,
can you write it for me? And then it writes it, and I hate what it's, right, like code, I mean,
and I hate what it's written. And so then, and then it motivates me, because I'm like,
this is not correct, here's the correct way to do it, you know, and so I actually go do the thing.
The place where I really use it, this might be what you're referencing, is a student and I have
been working on a Korto extension, and, like, figuring out the structure to make a Korto
extension was pretty straightforward. I took a really great workshop at PositConf about it,
but also there's good documentation, but the one we wanted to write, it had to be JavaScript,
it couldn't be done in R, and so the, and I don't know JavaScript, so the way that I did this
is I literally went line by line. I didn't write the whole program in R, because it didn't really
make sense, but I would say, okay, like, what I'm trying to do here is, I don't know, loop through
all of these strings looking for a regular expression. So I'd write the one line in R,
like, you know, per map, start attack, whatever, and copy that line into chat.gpt and say translate
this to JavaScript, and then I'd copy that back in and I'd run it on some tests. So it was, like,
a very tedious process, and it didn't work to just design the whole thing and say, write me this in
JavaScript, partially because it wasn't perfect, and partially because, like, I don't have the
ability to debug a full program in JavaScript, but I do have the ability to debug line by line,
you know, test this line and make sure it does what I want. So that was where I was using it.
Yeah, it's so interesting, and this is the, just for context, you said the Flourish extension,
is that right, to highlight, like, different aspects of code?
Yeah, it's, I don't know if you ever used Flare back in the day, but Flare was the version for
R Markdown that was totally built in R, and, like, Corto opens up so many cleaner ways to
do what Flare was doing. Flare was very hacky. But what it's for is so that you can, like,
for teaching mainly, so that you can establish, you know, you've written a code chunk, and when
you show it to the students, you want it to highlight, you know, all the functions or
something like that, but you still want it to be reproducible so that what you're running is
the output of that code. So, yeah, the Flare and then Flourish is a way to, well, with Flourish,
you put it in the Corto comments, and you say, like, which words in the ensuing code you want
to be highlighted, and so it still behaves like an ordinary code chunk in every way,
but the visual on the screen also has the highlighting, in addition to the syntax
highlighting, if that makes sense. Yeah. Yeah, if I understand with Flare, you were kind of,
you kind of got meta. You, like, were calling a function over the code you wanted to format
to output. Yeah, with Flare, I was using, like, the sub-render tricks in Knitter. So I was running
the render, pulling the raw HTML that outputs from that render just on the one chunk, and then,
like, manually injecting HTML wrappers to make it be, you know, highlighted with a yellow background
or what have you. So it was very hacky, yeah. I know you mentioned, like, really enjoying
collaboration and being around people. You mentioned you have some applied projects with
friends on campus. Is this, like, projects with other professors, or? Yeah, the, I think the one
that is the most fun to talk about is my collaborator in history. His name is Greg Domber,
and he works on the Polish Revolution. So, like, in 1989, you know, in Poland, they all met,
this group of 500-and-some people met at a series of meetings and, like, peacefully transitioned
from communism to democracy, or dictatorship. And so he has collected, like, painstakingly by hand
over a decade, data about those 500 people and what they were doing since 1950. So he has this,
like, wonderful longitudinal social network data that is, you know, these two people were in this
organization together. These two people co-signed this protest letter, et cetera. Yeah, and then I
have been working for, like, eight years now on that data. You know, the first thing was cleaning
it, which was big. I give him credit because he wrote it all down in a spreadsheet, and that's,
like, very impressive for a historian. But there was a lot of work to do. And then we made a shiny
app where you can explore these, and we presented it in Poland a year and a half ago, which was very
cool. And now we're working on kind of doing some, like, modeling analysis to talk about, you know,
people that were in this one organization, were they in some way more impactful than people in
this other organization, that sort of thing. How'd you get involved with that? Like, how'd you
get in the door on that? Like, the second week that I landed on campus, he sent me an email
because I had listed my research interests on the website, and I put digital humanities because I
really like, you know, text analysis, literary analysis, that sort of thing. And we got coffee
on campus, and he was telling me all this, like, oh, I have this idea that if we had, you know,
these connections and we could study it. And he had a really good vision for it as someone who
isn't a data scientist. I mean, he might be now, but he wasn't then. And I was getting more and
more skeptical. Like, okay, like, plenty of people have these aspirations where they think that
statistical analysis is just, like, throw everything in a blender and you get a magic
answer, you know? And then he opened his spreadsheet, and I was like, oh, you have data!
You've actually collected this data and structured it in a clean, not clean, but a consistent,
anyway, form. So, yeah, it was very cool. And so we've just been working on it ever since and
become great friends. Yeah, it's so interesting to hear. I feel like, just about how you choose
projects or, like, how projects run past your desk as a statistics professor. There are way
more available than we have time to do, right? There's plenty of people on campus who want help
with their data. Our department has a consulting service that sometimes you, like, make connections
through that. You know, Greg obviously just reached out to me. My other applied project right
now with my friend Katie Watts was actually, we have a data science capstone sequence where the
students get in groups and work on a real project. And so we solicit projects from campus for that.
And so she brought her data to that. And then, you know, that made a lot of progress. And then
one of those students is now continuing that progress as a master's project with me. So
it just builds from there. Yeah. One thing I'm curious about is, like, how you
pick up new skills or how you spend time staying current. And I know you mentioned, like, some of
the challenges of being an educator. Yeah, I mean, I think, like, a thing that I wish people thought
about more as far as educators, and especially educators, you know, my job is not a research job.
There's a little bit of research element, but it's a teaching job, right? You know, people in the
industry say, oh, like, Python is now a little more of a lingua franca. We want Python, or we
want SQL, or we want whatever. And how am I going to teach that to a student if I didn't learn it,
right? And so the only way that I'm going to teach that to a student is I'm going to go out
and learn it myself. That's kind of fun sometimes, but it's not, you know, I don't have any extra
time in my day to do that. I'm not paid to do that. It really is a labor of love anytime you
pick up a new skill. So there's this disconnect where there's sometimes, you know, the industry
needs, especially in this field that moves so fast, and the industry needs are not things we
can offer, you know, for the graduates going into the industry, because we don't know them. So,
you know, when I picked up Python, that was literally just, I learned it. Like, I did my
own class. I inherited some materials from someone else, worked through them, and then tried to teach
them, and it was rough the first time. And there's a big demand for SQL right now in our department.
I would be happy to learn SQL, but I don't have time. So that's tough. So as far as new skills
that I pick up for fun for myself, you know, I think of a lot of the R work I do not as work.
I think of it as a thing I do for fun. So when something exciting, you know, comes across my
blue sky, or I find out in a conference or something, and then I, like, get an idea and
sit down and do it, that doesn't feel like a work task. It feels like the same as when I
cut stickers on my cricket. You know, it's like a hobby. So I pick up new skills in the R world
just because I'm excited to. But when it's, like, skills needed for class. And then there's this
decision in the classroom, too, of there's these skills that I've picked up. Do I build them into
the class? You know, I mean, even the moment where we converted our R class from base R primary to
tidyverse primary, that was a lot of work, even though I knew the tidyverse. There's the conversion.
And I'm actually, Wes, you might have an interesting thought. I went through this fall
of whether I needed to rebuild my Python class with Polars, and I ended up not doing it this time.
But I feel like I need to build it in there soon. And then there's the whole, you know,
DuckDB Arrow world. Do I build that in at some point? So even the stuff that I know how to do,
that's a different thing than having built the materials to teach it, which also is in my free
time. So, yeah. **Matt Stauffer**
Right now I'm having a conversation with my editors at O'Reilly about Python for Data Analysis,
which is now a 13-year-old book. And we're talking about a fourth edition. And so I think
we're going to do a fourth edition that still uses Pandas, but I'm using Polars more and more.
And maybe two years ago, I used Polars a little bit, and it would run into bugs and it would crash
and it felt like it wasn't ready for primetime. Whereas I'm building stuff with Polars, I'm
not writing that much Polars code directly. I'm having Cloud Code write a lot of the Polars code.
But it's fast. It's got an API that's, especially if you're dealing with complex datasets
and dealing with more Arrow-like data, like JSON data and stuff like that, it's definitely
a lot more powerful and expressive for some of those more complex transformations.
But yeah, it's this transitional period where people need to know Pandas and maybe Polars,
and then maybe eventually things will become more Polars-native in the future.
One of the good things for education is that Polars is a lot smaller. API is a lot less complex
in many ways than Pandas. And so I feel like it may actually be easier to teach. And there's fewer
rough edges. You don't have to care about it. There's no indexes. And so I know that indexes
is one of those complexities that people coming from the Arrow world find very tedious and
unintuitive in Pandas. And so I totally feel that pain. Yeah. And it is interesting to Wes's point
about Polars. Sometimes these tools, if they do offer a simplification, maybe the whole class
gets easier versus shifting to something. Yeah. I'm definitely pro a simpler API is one
version of better. I'm not always attached to speed or breadth of abilities. But not from the
teaching... I mean, from the teaching perspective, I want them to have the skills that they need
going forward, which right now, Pandas... I'm trying really hard to say Pandas. I get really
made fun of because for some reason I got in the habit of saying Pandas like it's a Greek word.
I actually see Pandas more like the Greek version. Yeah. Yes.
Of the man himself. Stamp of approval. You have it here. Yeah.
Yeah. If you watch old, early videos of me talking about the project, it's definitely
more Pandas and not pandas. Yeah. It is like... This is exaltic. This is fantastic. Now I just
need to get everyone saying data.table and then I'll stop being made fun of. Anyway,
train of thought. Yes. Pandas. Oh, yeah. So in the jobs that they're going into, I have the
impression that the data science teams are still using Pandas over Polars at the moment. So I'd
rather send them out able to use Pandas. We'll see. Okay. So maybe this is a good question for
Wes. We talked a little bit about staying current and I saw one thing you had asked us before this
is how do we stay current or up to date on things? Wes, do you have any takes on how do you stay
on top of technology or pick up new tools? It's hard. It's really overwhelming to know
what to pay attention to at any given time because there's only so much new information
you can take in and internalize. And so just choosing like what new things to learn about
and get your mind wrapped around, I find is really difficult. And so I had hardly used Polars at all
until maybe a year or two ago. I knew that it existed. I knew that it was in development.
It was actually a relief for me because when we started the Arrow project about 10 years ago,
I thought that I was going to get on the hook to build a next generation Pandas-like library that
was based on Arrow. But fortunately, Richie showed up and started building Polars and it's
as good or better than anything I could have built if I had decided to work on that thing.
I was a little bit AI skeptical for a long time and so I turned a blind eye for a really long
period of time to everything AI related in the Python ecosystem. And Python has become a little
bit taken over by the AI world in recent years. And so I was looking at the top 100 most popular,
at least based on GitHub stars, projects on GitHub. And half the projects are projects that I've never
heard of. I'm like, gosh, there's this project that I've never heard of and it's got 50,000
stars on GitHub. I feel like I don't know anything. So it's hard. And I'm sure that
people listening also identify with that struggle that it seems like every day you go to Hacker
News or you go to Reddit and there's a new project that is getting a lot of attention
that you haven't heard of. But I think what's interesting is that when I started out working
in this area, and this is probably true of all of us, is that data science and Python and R
were not mainstream at all. And now it's become so mainstream. And so that's just increased the
volume of new projects and things going on. And so it's a hundred times harder to keep in touch
and to be aware of all the things that are going on compared with what it was like 10 or 15 years
ago. Yeah, pause it. It's interesting being on the open source team. I think similar to teaching a
course, if you're teaching a Python course, it's a good excuse to learn Python. I feel like a lot
of that happens in open source too, where you're like, if I could build some useful open source
tool that uses some technology, it's like a good excuse for me to kind of familiarize myself with
that technology. But it is hard because then it has to be maintained forever. So there is a sort of
trade-off. Yeah, I'm curious about that from both of you. It could be a full-time job just
maintaining your existing projects. So how do you decide where to split your brainpower between
making sure that project stays current versus any new ideas that you might have?
Fortunately for me, it seems that the pattern that I've developed over the years is that I
start or help start projects and then get them to a place of critical mass where
I recruit developers to join the core team to maintain the project. And then when
the project is being sufficiently well looked after and maintained, I move on to start the
next project. And so a fortunate side effect for me is that I'm not actively maintaining any
open source projects right now. Of course, there's a large team maintaining Pandas, and there's a
team of people maintaining Arrow, and Ibis is in need of more maintainers. So if anybody listening
is interested in helping maintain Ibis, I may get back involved in the project
because I think it's an important project that has a bright future.
But it's hard. And another thing that I spoke about in a talk recently was that
with now with generated AI and ChatGPT and Cloud and all these things,
it's going to lead to much more use of these open source projects because ChatGPT
and friends are all really good at writing Pandas code, and they're all really good at
writing Polars code. And so now the effective, the addressable audience, the addressable user
base of people who can become Polars users or become Pandas users is probably 10 or 100 times
what it was before. And so to go from 10 million global Pandas users to half a billion Pandas
users who are now running into the same bugs and issues that everyone else is running into.
But, you know, open AI isn't helping maintain Pandas. So like, what the heck?
I mean, maybe at some point they should, but they're not right now.
I wonder, are there Python users who don't know they're Python users? My friend just showed me,
he's like planning his wedding, and he's like, oh, I just asked ChatGPT to code me an app
that I can use for tracking guests and so forth. And he showed me this app and I said,
what language is this app in? And he's like, oh, no, he like never saw the back end
of the app. It's just like built and deployed. Because LLMs are not good at doing data analysis
directly. So they need to offload all of that onto, you know, R code or Pandas code or whatnot.
And so, yeah, like anybody who's asking an LLM to do any kind of analysis is going to
end up touching one of these end up touching one of these one of these libraries. So,
you know, if we had perfect, you know, if we had perfect knowledge of the future,
going back in time when we created these, these open source licenses, if we could have baked in
some kind of like, you know, AI use royalty payment into like the license, like it's free
to do whatever you want. But if you if you use this code, if you use like code that involves
this library to train your models, and then, you know, you offer suggestions that you have to
provide, like, I mean, even even if, if, you know, even if chat TPT provided like, like 100th of a
cent or 1000th of a cent for every response that it provides that uses pandas code, like I'm pretty
confident that would generate a lot of revenue that would help help fund maintenance in the
project. But, you know, we'll never retroactively be able to do something like that. And I don't
even think that would be the right thing to do. It's best for the software to be free and
free as in freedom and free free as in beer. So it is interesting, though, I feel like anytime
chat GPT, like starts rolling pandas, it is kind of surprising to think about like that.
Yeah, this tool is just how it's thinking about data, basically, like that's how it works through
data. Well, yeah, well, well, the the flip side of that question is that and the thing that I've
been thinking a lot about lately, and I asked everyone about it, what they think is that it
will be hard to get people to use new open source projects when their AI assistants don't know how
to use them yet. And so it creates this like chicken and egg problem where chat TPT is really
good at using pandas because there's huge amounts of training data available on GitHub and all over
the internet of people using pandas to solve problems. And so they've been able to take in
all of this data and become really good at solving problems with pandas. But suppose a new
tool comes along, and there's just not a corpus of training data to teach the LLMs how to how to
how to use them. And so that basically, if people become utterly dependent on AI tools to do
anything, then new projects will never get used, they'll never get training data generated. I mean,
maybe the LLMs will like read the documentation and experiment and build their own training
data sets. Like, I don't know. But it's, it's definitely a weird future that we're that we're
entering where the whole, like model of how training data for AI gets generated is going
to change fundamentally, and how people discover and use new tools. Because a lot of people are
just not going to be motivated to learn how to use things the old fashioned way where they read
the documentation, and they fumble around in their text editor, and they experiment and learn how to
use it themselves. They say, Oh, well, chat TPT doesn't know how to use it. So I guess I'll use
something else. That's probably what's already happening, I would think.
I think, you know, when I watch my students try to adopt a new function, you know, they certainly
turn to AI first. And it's not necessarily a bad thing, I would actually say, like,
the AI explaining the function tends to be more digestible than reading the documentation.
But what they there's two things that are skills that they don't seem to have right now. And I
don't know if any of us are experts in this one is doing the right query, right? So if you ask,
here's this function, show me some examples and explain why they work, that's going to get you
much further than what is this function? So the prompt engineering, which is a very fancy way
of saying it, but what should you ask is hard. And then the checking afterwards, you know,
not just because AI isn't always accurate, but just because like, still good to look and say,
this argument needs to be a data frame or whatever. And so I'm seeing them not do those
steps. And I'm getting a lot more, like they have found a cool function that will solve their
problem. And then it's not working. And the reason it's not working is they put in an array and it
wanted a data frame or something like that. And they don't know how to fix that problem.
One thing I really want to be sure to loop back to is I love that you gave a keynote at USAR
on keeping R weird. I was wondering if you could just say a little bit about that.
And maybe after like what, yeah, what do you think are the key ingredients to keep Python weird?
No, yeah, that was, that was so cool of a thing to get to do. I'm not really a nervous speaker.
And you can really hear that I started that one out super nervous just because I looked out and
I was like, all my heroes are in this audience plus a thousand other people. It was like really
intimidating. But no, it was a really fun talk to put together because, because there's kind of the
two types of weirdness, right? There's the language is a weird language. And I didn't know
that because it was my first fluency. Well, it wasn't my first language, but it was the first
one that I was really embedded in, you know, and I'm not a computer scientist. And so learning from
people as I got deeper into R, how it's weird was fun. But then the community is very quirky,
especially the like sort of tidyverse pocket. Although I think that now it's just kind of a
mix of everyone. Yeah. I mean, I don't know if Python, maybe Python's already weird. I do think
the reputation from the outside for Python has changed a lot. It was, you know, maybe 10 years
ago or something, it was a bro language and I had no real interest in getting involved in that
community. And now it feels more like the R community, like there's pie ladies and there's
fun stickers. And I met this woman that use R this past summer who had a really cool Python tattoo
and like all these things that feel special to me seem to be existing. And that makes me
more excited to get involved with Python, even though I don't love writing Python code. I prefer
not to. But so I hope that that's spreading. And I think a lot of that comes with an openness,
like when you don't take yourself so seriously, it also makes a culture where when a beginner
is asking a question, you know, you don't jump on them. You don't say, well, it's in the
documentation. The beginner doesn't know how to read documentation, you know, and so I've always
really appreciated about specifically the tidyverse pocket of the R community where back in the old
days of Rstats Twitter, like someone would ask a question, very basic question, and it might be like
Hadley or Jenny or Mina who would jump in and answer it. And that's, you know, that feeling of
my question is so not stupid that a name that I recognize will answer me. It is like so important
to making people excited to work on it. And so that's where my perception, whether it was true
or not, of the bro culture back in the day for Python has changed. I now feel like it's a language
that is welcoming to beginners, and I'm not sure what shifted that. This is all my semi-outsider
perspective. But yeah, I think that's a value of turning into like one big party instead of like
this very serious, you know, let me think about the stack in the heap sort of approach to open
source. I think on the, yeah, I mean, I think on the Python side, like I think compared with R,
I think the R community by comparison, not to say it's 100% like this, but the R community is a lot
more, trying to find the right description, like culturally homogenous and that like a lot of the
R community comes from like a statistical origin. Like people, you know, they entered into learning
R because they started out in statistics or biostatistics or like more of like a statistical
field. And then, and so like that's like the foundation or core of the R ecosystem. Whereas
like Python started out being like a little bit more like Unix sysadmin, and then it developed
the web development ecosystem. And then, but there was always this scientific computing thing off on
the side. And then that turned into a data thing, which now has gotten really big. And the data
thing grew an AI appendage. And then the web developers were, you know, a little bit uncomfortable
with the rapid growth of all the data people. And so there was this weird period in the mid-2010s
where I think, I feel like the web community, the Python web community, wasn't sure what to make of
like PyCon becoming a lot more about like data and science and in machine learning and AI.
And so the modern Python ecosystem, I do think it's gotten a lot more accessible,
like welcoming to beginners and more focused on like having a big tenant, like not having like
exclusionary behavior, like, oh, you haven't been doing Python since the 1990s. Haha. Like,
you know, get out of here, noob. Like, there's no, I don't really see any of that
happening in the Python world, like you see in some other kind of more prickly programmer
communities. So it's very welcoming, but it's still like, it's still very like feudal and
federated. And there's like cliques and pockets of people that are separated by the type of work that
they do. And so I think that the AI and machine learning people are very different from the data
science people and even more different from like the web developers. But there's also people who
are like primarily using Python to do like, you know, Arduino or like robotics projects and,
you know, all kinds of stuff. So it's a strange ecosystem. But the fact that it's become so
mainstream is also like, for me, the biggest, like the biggest, the biggest change that,
that, you know, it's hard to, you know, I have to remind myself, like, oh, Python is a mainstream
language. Now I used to feel niche, and now it's very mainstream. I take your point about like web
developers being very different, federated, you know, different from the data science or AI.
But I would push back and say, most people come to Python through computer science. Like,
most people see Python and they learn it. That's true. That's absolutely true. Yeah. And CS101. So
most people come to R through some variety of statistics, but they're not statisticians,
or they're not even taking a statistics class necessarily. Like a lot of people are coming to
R because they have data in biology, or they have data in history now, or, you know, they have data,
and they're like, this is the language people told me I should use to run my t-test, you know. So
the statistics part is true, but it's not statisticians. And I wouldn't say the
plurality even of R users are statisticians. Yeah. Yeah. I think it would be more fair to say
data than statistics. Yeah. To correct myself. Yeah. It's like, yeah. Yeah. So the homogeneity,
I mean, maybe R is less, like, siloed than the Python community. But I think that the variability
in the, like, particular skills or expertise of the people coming to the language is maybe higher.
I think most people coming to Python know what a for loop is, you know. And like, many people are
using R successfully and don't know what a for loop is. So there's a background hetero, how do
you say that word? Heterogeneity. Yeah. That makes the R community a little more,
you just get a lot more different perspectives, perhaps. Yeah. Makes sense. Yeah. It's fair to
data. Data analysis spans so many domains that it really brings in a pretty wide net. I remember for
myself, it was like, I was using R so heavily to analyze psychology experiments. And then once I
realized, like, I think I might want to go into industry and maybe, like, at least open up software
engineering as an option. I just sort of, like, switched immediately to Python. But I do feel like
that it is an interesting sort of comparison to, like, data analysis, people in different domains
analyzing data versus more sort of, like, software engineering centric, computer science centric
folks and what they're drawn to. If not, this opens up what I think is the most controversial
take that you gave, which is, I saw you listed candy corn as a top tier. Yes. Candy.
And I actually have so many questions. Does this, okay, by top tier, are you saying that it's an,
are you saying it's an all year candy or, you know, what do you think? Absolutely. Yeah. It's
like red vines, candy corn. Uh-huh. You want to see candy corn brought out of the seasonal.
When I was in high school, I was playing a lot of sports. So I, like, ate like a vacuum and I would
come home from school from my, like, back to back practices and I had to eat a bag of candy corn and
drink a full Gatorade. Just like. Oh my gosh. High school. That. I'm too old for that now.
It's incredible. They need candy corn flavored Gatorade. That's the
solution, you know? I don't know. Actually, that kind of freaks me out. Yeah. Fierce Climb Gatorade
was discontinued and that was like. Yeah. And how would you, I guess for, like, I don't know how
universal candy corn is. So if you had to describe candy corn for someone who's, like, mentally
picturing like a tiny piece of corn that's been candied, how would you paint the picture of what
a candy corn is just to be sure people know what we're talking about? You're asking me to
deconstruct the definition. Just paint the picture a candy corn. It is sugar in triangular prism form
and the important thing about candy corn, any sugar is sugar, but is the texture, right? It
has the perfect texture to make your teeth feel good chomping on it without it sticking. That's
why it's up to you. I feel that. Yeah. It's like and the texture, I guess, is like inspired by wax
in a way is that it's like kind of like. You're going to tell me that you've never taken the wax
from one of those. What are the little little cheese things with the wax on the outside and
chewed on it as a kid? No, it's even more controversial. You mean like the little
I'm not recommending that one, but you know, when you're a kid and you're like, I don't know,
yeah, eat it. Maybe I should try. I mean, even as an adult, I'm open to it as an adult. So that's
my next. You can report back. I'll report back next episode. I'll just be I'm just going to be
chomping on one of those like wrappers and we'll see what happens. Well, Kelly, thanks so much for
coming on. I think I feel like I just love the energy you bring to the art community. And
anytime I see you at a comp and you're wheeling, I'm actually so sad I didn't. I have them back
here. I think the earrings you're. Yeah, you were slinging earrings, laser cut earrings. I just I
so deeply appreciate the community and just like welcoming. Also, the level of pump you bring
into situations like the whole. I mean, I just it's fun, right? Like for me, positive
comp is like a highlight of the year. We go to board game conventions and then we go to my
art convention. And so I think of it and yeah, I think, well. It was I had planned my wedding so
that I could go to last year because like I don't want to miss priorities. And now having now gone
for eight years, I guess not counting covid like these people are my real friends. You know, Michael,
I'm excited to see you. Sorry, Wes, this is the first time I've talked a little bit. You know,
it's it's like it's like a reunion, too. So I I don't know that I appreciate you saying that
you like the enthusiasm, but the enthusiasm is not. Again, I don't I don't view it as work. Like
I'm really appreciative of all the things that the people are doing in the community. I didn't start
the earring thing. I didn't start the crafting. I didn't start the hex stickers. I just get to
benefit from that. And. It's yeah, I like feel very grateful for all the things that the people
have built, both the actual technological tools, but the community that's formed, it's yeah,
it makes my job much more fun for sure. No, it's incredible. And I think that like really
shines through. And I'm yeah, I'm so excited for years and years of keeping our weird. So
I learned that I didn't coin that. I don't know how that phrase got stuck in my head,
but Hadley dug up some talk he gave from way back when where he had to keep our weird slide.
And I feel like it's almost certain that I saw that and it stuck in my head. So
everything I do is I think taking a slide to keynote is such a beautiful number. Someone
had to like expound to write a thesis on the keeping of weirdness. So I'm glad I'm glad it
was you. And thanks. Thanks so much for coming on. And we'll I'll see you at the next comp
and on the internet probably. And I'll see you if not sooner at the next comp.
That's great. And Wes, great to talk to you. I really appreciate everything you've done.
The Test Set is a production of PositPBC, an open source and enterprise tooling data
science software company. This episode was produced in collaboration with creative studio
Agi. For more episodes, visit the test set.co or find us on your favorite podcast platform.